Bush Supporters Still Believe Iraq Had WMD or Major Program,
Supported al Qaeda



Agree with Kerry Supporters Bush Administration Still Saying This is the
Case 
Agree US Should Not Have Gone to War if No WMD or Support for al Qaeda

Bush Supporters Misperceive World Public as Not Opposed to Iraq War,
Favoring Bush Reelection


Even after the final report of Charles Duelfer to Congress saying that
Iraq did not have a significant WMD program, 72% of Bush supporters
continue to believe that Iraq had actual WMD (47%) or a major program for
developing them (25%). Fifty-six percent assume that most experts believe
Iraq had actual WMD and 57% also assume, incorrectly, that Duelfer
concluded Iraq had at least a major WMD program. Kerry supporters hold
opposite beliefs on all these points.

Similarly, 75% of Bush supporters continue to believe that Iraq was
providing substantial support to al Qaeda, and 63% believe that clear
evidence of this support has been found. Sixty percent of Bush supporters
assume that this is also the conclusion of most experts, and 55% assume,
incorrectly, that this was the conclusion of the 9/11 Commission. Here
again, large majorities of Kerry supporters have exactly opposite
perceptions. 

These are some of the findings of a new study of the differing perceptions
of Bush and Kerry supporters, conducted by the Program on International
Policy Attitudes and Knowledge Networks, based on polls conducted in
September and October. 

Steven Kull, director of PIPA, comments, "One of the reasons that Bush
supporters have these beliefs is that they perceive the Bush
administration confirming them. Interestingly, this is one point on which
Bush and Kerry supporters agree." Eighty-two percent of Bush supporters
perceive the Bush administration as saying that Iraq had WMD (63%) or that
Iraq had a major WMD program (19%). Likewise, 75% say that the Bush
administration is saying Iraq was providing substantial support to al
Qaeda. Equally large majorities of Kerry supporters hear the Bush
administration expressing these views--73% say the Bush administration is
saying Iraq had WMD (11% a major program) and 74% that Iraq was
substantially supporting al Qaeda. 

Steven Kull adds, "Another reason that Bush supporters may hold to these
beliefs is that they have not accepted the idea that it does not matter
whether Iraq had WMD or supported al Qaeda. Here too they are in agreement
with Kerry supporters." Asked whether the US should have gone to war with
Iraq if US intelligence had concluded that Iraq was not making WMD or
providing support to al Qaeda, 58% of Bush supporters said the US should
not have, and 61% assume that in this case the President would not
have. Kull continues, "To support the president and to accept that he took
the US to war based on mistaken assumptions likely creates substantial
cognitive dissonance, and leads Bush supporters to suppress awareness of
unsettling information about prewar Iraq."

This tendency of Bush supporters to ignore dissonant information extends
to other realms as well. Despite an abundance of evidence--including polls
conducted by Gallup International in 38 countries, and more recently by a
consortium of leading newspapers in 10 major countries--only 31% of Bush
supporters recognize that the majority of people in the world oppose the
US having gone to war with Iraq. Forty-two percent assume that views are
evenly divided, and 26% assume that the majority approves. Among Kerry
supporters, 74% assume that the majority of the world is opposed. 

Similarly, 57% of Bush supporters assume that the majority of people in
the world would favor Bush's reelection; 33% assumed that views are evenly
divided and only 9% assumed that Kerry would be preferred. A recent poll
by GlobeScan and PIPA of 35 of the major countries around the world found
that in 30, a majority or plurality favored Kerry, while in just 3 Bush
was favored. On average, Kerry was preferred more than two to one. 

Bush supporters also have numerous misperceptions about Bush's
international policy positions. Majorities incorrectly assume that Bush
supports multilateral approaches to various international issues--the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (69%), the treaty banning land mines
(72%)--and for addressing the problem of global warming: 51% incorrectly
assume he favors US participation in the Kyoto treaty. After he denounced
the International Criminal Court in the debates, the perception that he
favored it dropped from 66%, but still 53% continue to believe that he
favors it. An overwhelming 74% incorrectly assumes that he favors
including labor and environmental standards in trade agreements. In all
these cases, majorities of Bush supporters favor the positions they impute
to Bush. Kerry supporters are much more accurate in their perceptions of
his positions on these issues. 

"The roots of the Bush supporters' resistance to information," according
to Steven Kull, "very likely lie in the traumatic experience of 9/11 and
equally in the near pitch-perfect leadership that President Bush showed in
its immediate wake. This appears to have created a powerful bond between
Bush and his supporters--and an idealized image of the President that
makes it difficult for his supporters to imagine that he could have made
incorrect judgments before the war, that world public opinion could be
critical of his policies or that the President could hold foreign policy
positions that are at odds with his supporters." 

The polls were conducted October 12-18 and September 3-7 and 8-12 with
samples of 968, 798 and 959 respondents, respectively. Margins of error
were 3.2 to 4% in the first and third surveys and 3.5% on September
3-7. The poll was fielded by Knowledge Networks using its nationwide
panel, which is randomly selected from the entire adult population and
subsequently provided internet access. For more information about this
methodology, go to www.knowledgenetworks.com/ganp. 


Funding for this research was provided by the Rockefeller Brothers Fund. 
